This chapter describes the standard syntax module which is available
with the extension @code{std}.

@section Legal

    This module is copyright in 2002-2013 by Volker Barthelmann.

    This archive may be redistributed without modifications and used
    for non-commercial purposes.

    Distributing modified versions and commercial usage needs my written
    consent.

    Certain modules may fall under additional copyrights.

@section Additional options for this version
 
This syntax module provides the following additional options:
 
@table @option
 
@item -ac
 Immediately allocate common symbols in .bss/.sbss section and
 define them as externally visible.
@item -nodotneeded
 Recognize assembly directives without a leading dot (@code{.}).
@item -sdlimit=<n>
 Put data up to a maximum size of n bytes into the small-data
 sections. Default is n=0, which means the function is disabled.

@end table

@section General Syntax

Labels have to be terminated with a colon (@code{:}).
Local labels are preceded by '@code{.}' and have to contain digits only.
Local labels are valid between two global label definitions.

Make sure that you don't define a label on the same line as a
directive for conditional assembly (if, else, endif)! This is not supported.

The operands are separated from the mnemonic by whitespace.
Multiple operands are separated by comma (@code{,}).

Comments are introduced by the comment character @code{#}. The rest
of the line will be ignored. For the c16x, m68k, 650x and ARM backends,
the comment character is @code{;} instead of @code{#}, although @code{#}
is still allowed when being the first non-blank character on a line.

Example:

@code{mylabel:  inst.q1.q2 op1,op2,op3  # comment}

In expressions, numbers starting with @code{0x} or @code{0X} are
hexadecimal (e.g. @code{0xfb2c}). @code{0b} or @code{0B} introduces
binary numbers (e.g. @code{0b1100101}). Other numbers starting with
@code{0} are assumed to be octal numbers, e.g. @code{0237}. All
numbers starting with a non-zero digit are decimal, e.g. @code{1239}.

@section Directives

The following directives are supported by this syntax module (if the
CPU- and output-module allow it):

@table @code
@item .2byte <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
 See @code{.uahalf}.

@item .4byte <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
See @code{.uaword}. 

@item .8byte <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
See @code{.uaquad}. 

@item .ascii <exp1>[,<exp2>,"<string1>"...]
See @code{.byte}. 

@item .abort <message>
      Immediately break assembly with a fatal error, showing the <message>
      from the operand field.

@item  .asciiz "<string1>"[,"<string2>"...]
See @code{.string}.    

@item .align <bit_count>[,<fill>]
      Insert as much fill bytes as required to reach an address where
      <bit_count> low order bits are zero. For example @code{.align 2} would
      make an alignment to the next 32-bit boundary.
      Note that this directive

@item .balign <byte_count>[,<fill>]
      Insert as much fill bytes as required to reach an address which
      is dividable by <byte_count>. For example @code{.balign 2} would
      make an alignment to the next 16-bit boundary.

@item .byte <exp1>[,<exp2>,"<string1>"...]
      Assign the integer or string constant operands into successive
      bytes of memory in the current section. Any combination of integer
      and character string constant operands is permitted.

@item .comm <symbol>,<size>[,<align>]
      Defines a common symbol which has a size of <size> bytes. The
      final size and alignment will be assigned by the linker, which
      will use the highest size and alignment values of all common
      symbols with the same name found. A common symbol is allocated
      in the .bss section in the final executable. ".comm"-areas of
      less than 8 bytes in size are aligned to word boundaries, other-
      wise to doubleword boundaries.

@item .endm
        Ends a macro definition.

@item .endr
        Ends a repetition block.

@item .equ <symbol>,<expression>
        See @code{.set}.

@item .err <message>
      Immediately break assembly with a fatal error, showing the <message>
      from the operand field.

@item .extern  <symbol>[,<symbol>...]
        See @code{.global}.

@item .fail <expression>
      Cause a warning when <expresion> is greater or equal 500. Otherwise
      cause an error.

@item .file "string"
      Set the filename of the input source. This may be used by some
      output modules. By default, the input filename passed on the
      command line is used.

@item .global <symbol>[,<symbol>...]
      Flag <symbol> as an external symbol, which means that <symbol> is
      visible to all modules in the linking process. It may be either
      defined or undefined.   

@item .globl <symbol>[,<symbol>...]
      See @code{.global}.

@item .half <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      If the current section location counter is not on a halfword
      boundary, advance it to the next halfword boundary. Then, assign
      the values of the operands into successive halfwords of memory in
      the current section.

@item .if <expression>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <expression> is non-zero.

@item .ifeq <expression>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <expression> is zero.

@item .ifne <expression>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <expression> is non-zero.

@item .ifgt <expression>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <expression> is
      greater than zero.

@item .ifge <expression>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <expression> is
      greater than zero or equal.

@item .iflt <expression>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <expression> is
      less than zero.

@item .ifle <expression>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <expression> is
      less than zero or equal.

@item .ifb <operand>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines when <operand> is
      completely blank, except an optional comment.

@item .ifnb <operand>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines when <operand> is
      non-blank.

@item .ifdef <symbol>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <symbol> is defined.

@item .ifndef <symbol>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <symbol> is undefined.

@item .incbin <file>
      Inserts the binary contents of <file> into the object code at
      this position. The file will be searched first in the current
      directory, then in all paths defined by @option{-I} or
      @code{.incdir} in the order of occurence.

@item .incdir <path>
      Add another path to search for include files to the list of
      known paths. Paths defined with @option{-I} on the command line are
      searched first.

@item .include <file>
      Include source text of <file> at this position. The include file
      will be searched first in the current directory, then in all
      paths defined by @option{-I} or @code{.incdir} in the order of
      occurence.

@item .int <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      See @code{.word}.

@item .lcomm <symbol>,<size>[,<alignment>] 
      Allocate <size> bytes of space in the .bss section and assign
      the value to that location to <symbol>. If <alignment> is given,
      then the space will be aligned to an address having <alignment>
      low zero bits or 2, whichever is greater.
      <symbol> may be made globally visible by the .globl directive.

@item .list
      The following lines will appear in the listing file, if it was
      requested.

@item .local <symbol>[,<symbol>...]
      Flag <symbol> as a local symbol, which means that <symbol> is
      local for the current file and invisible to other modules in
      the linking process.

@item .long <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      See @code{.word}.

@item .macro <name> [<arguments>...]
      Defines a macro which can be referenced by <name>. The macro
      definition is closed by an @code{.endm} directive. When calling
      a macro you may pass up to 9 arguments, separated by comma. Those
      arguments are referenced within the macro context as @code{\1} to
      @code{\9}, or optionally by named arguments, which may be specified
      after the <name>, separated by commas.
      Argument @code{\0} is set to the macro's first qualifier
      (mnemonic extension), when given.
      The special argument @code{\@@} inserts a unique id,
      useful for defining labels.
      @code{\()} may be used as a separator between the name of a macro
      argument and the subsequent text.

@item .nolist
      The following lines will not be visible in a listing file.

@item .org <exp>
      Defines the start address for the subsequent code.
      When <exp> starts with a current-pc symbol and a plus (@code{+})
      operator, then the directive behaves like @code{.space}.

@item .quad <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      If the current section location counter is not on a quadword
      boundary, advance it to the next quadword boundary. Then, assign
      the values of the operands into successive quadwords of memory in
      the current section.

@item .rept <expression>
      Repeats the assembly of the block between @code{.rept} and @code{.endr}
      <expression> number of times. <expression> has to be positive.

@item .section <name>[,"<attributes>"]
      Starts a new section named <name> or reactivate an old one. If
      attributes are given for an already existing section, they must
      match exactly. The section's name will also be defined as a new
      symbol, which represents the section's start address.
      The "<attributes>" string may consist of the following characters:

      Section Contents:
@table @code
@item c 
         section has code

@item d 
         section has initialized data

@item u 
         section has uninitialized data

@item i 
         section has directives (info section)

@item n 
         section can be discarded
            
@item R 
         remove section at link time
            
@item a 
         section is allocated in memory
@end table

      Section Protection:

@table @code          
@item r 
         section is readable
            
@item w 
         section is writable
           
@item  x 
         section is executable
           
@item  s 
         section is sharable
@end table

      Section Alignment: A digit, which is ignored. The assembler will
      automatically align the section to the highest alignment restriction
      used within.

      Memory flags (Amiga hunk format only):

@table @code
            
@item C 
         load section to Chip RAM
           
@item  F 
         load section to Fast RAM 

@end table

@item .set <symbol>,<expression>
      Create a new program symbol with the name <symbol> and assign to it
      the value of <expression>. If <symbol> is already assigned, it will
      contain a new value from now on.
 
@item .size <symbol>,<size>
      Set the size in bytes of an object defined at <symbol>. 

@item .short <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      See @code{.half}.
 
@item .space <exp>[,<fill>]
      See @code{.space}.

@item .space <exp>[,<fill>]
      Insert <exp> zero or <fill> bytes into the current section.

@item .stabs "<name>",<type>,<other>,<desc>,<exp>
      Add an stab-entry for debugging, including a symbol-string and
      an expression.

@item .stabn <type>,<other>,<desc>,<exp>
      Add an stab-entry for debugging, without a symbol-string.

@item .stabd <type>,<other>,<desc>
      Add an stab-entry for debugging, without symbol-string and value.

@item .string "<string1>"[,"<string2>"...]
        Like @code{.byte}, but adds a terminating zero-byte.

@item .type <symbol>,<type>
      Set type of symbol called <symbol> to <type>, which must be one of:
@table @code
      @item 1: Object
      @item 2: Function
      @item 3: Section
      @item 4: File
@end table
      The predefined symbols @code{@@object} and 
        @code{@@function} are available for
      this purpose.
 
@item .uahalf <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Assign the values of the operands into successive two-byte areas of
      memory in the current section regardless of section alignment.
 
@item .ualong <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      See @code{.uaword}.

@item .uaquad <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Assign the values of the operands into successive eight-byte areas of
      memory in the current section regardless of section alignment.

@item .uashort <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      See @code{.uahalf}.
 
@item .uaword <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Assign the values of the operands into successive four-byte areas
      of memory in the current section regardless of section alignment.

@item .weak <symbol>[,<symbol>...]
      Flag <symbol> as a weak symbol, which means that <symbol> is
      visible to all modules in the linking process and may be replaced
      by any global symbol with the same name.
      When a weak symbol remains undefined its value defaults to 0.
 
@item .word <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      If the current section location counter is not on a word boundary
      advance it to the next word boundary. Then assign the values of the
      operands into successive words of memory in the current section. 

@end table

Predefined section directives:
@table @code
@item .bss
      .section ".bss","aurw"
@item .data
      .section ".data","adrw"
@item .rodata
      .section ".rodata","adr"
@item .sbss
      .section ".sbss","aurw"
@item .sdata
      .section ".sdata","adrw"
@item .sdata2
      .section ".sdata2","adr"
@item .stab
      .section ".stab","dr"
@item .stabstr
      .section ".stabstr","dr"
@item .text
      .section ".text","acrx"
@item .tocd
      .section ".tocd","adrw"
@end table

@section Known Problems

    Some known problems of this module at the moment:

@itemize @minus

@item None.

@end itemize

@section Error Messages

This module has the following error messages:

@itemize @minus
@item 1001: mnemonic expected
@item 1002: invalid extension
@item 1003: no space before operands
@item 1004: too many closing parentheses
@item 1005: missing closing parentheses
@item 1006: missing operand
@item 1007: scratch at end of line
@item 1008: \" expected
@item 1009: invalid data operand
@item 1010: , expected
@item 1011: identifier expected
@item 1012: illegal escape sequence \\%c
@item 1013: expression must be constant
@item 1014: unexpected endm without macro
@item 1015: endif without if
@item 1016: if without endif
@item 1017: maximum if-nesting depth exceeded (%d levels)
@item 1018: else without if
@item 1019: syntax error
@item 1020: unexpected endr without rept
@item 1021: symbol <%s> already defined with %s scope
@end itemize
