This chapter describes the Motorola syntax module, mostly used for the
M68k family of CPUs, which is available with the extension @code{mot}.

@section Legal

    This module is copyright in 2002-2013 by Frank Wille.

    This archive may be redistributed without modifications and used
    for non-commercial purposes.

    Distributing modified versions and commercial usage needs my written
    consent.

    Certain modules may fall under additional copyrights.

@section Additional options for this version
 
This syntax module provides the following additional options:
 
@table @option
 
@item -align
 Enables 16-bit alignment for constant declaration (@code{dc.?},
 except @code{dc.b}) directives.

@item -devpac
 Devpac-compatibility mode.
@itemize @minus
  @item Enables 16-bit alignment for constant declaration (@code{dc.?},
        except @code{dc.b}) directives.
  @item Predefines offset symbols @code{__RS}, @code{__SO} and @code{__FO} as
        @code{0}, which in vasm are undefined until first referenced.
  @item Disable escape codes in strings (see @option{-noesc}).
  @item Enable dots within identifiers (see @option{-ldots}).
  @item Up to 35 macro arguments.
@end itemize

@item -ldots
 Allow dots (@code{.}) within all identifiers.

@item -localu
 Local symbols are introduced by @code{'_'} instead of @code{'.'}. For
 Devpac compatbility, which offers a similar option.

@item -phxass
 PhxAss-compatibilty mode. Enables the following features:
@itemize @minus
  @item @code{section <name>} starts a code section named @code{<name>}
        instead of a section which also has the type @code{<name>}.
  @item Macro names are treated as case-insensitive.
  @item Up to 35 macro arguments.
  @item Allow blanks in operands.
  @item Defines the symbol @code{_PHXASS_}.
@end itemize

@item -spaces
 Allow blanks in operands.

@end table

@section General Syntax

Labels always start at the first column and may be terminated by a
colon (@code{:}), but don't need to. In the last case the mnemonic
has to be separated from the label by whitespace (not required in
any case, e.g. with @code{=}). Qualifiers are appended to the mnemonic
separated by a dot (if the CPU-module supports qualifiers). The
operands are separated from the mnemonic by whitespace. Multiple
operands are separated by comma (@code{,}).

Local labels are preceded by '@code{.}' or terminated by '@code{$}'.
For the rest, any alphanumeric character including '@code{_}' is allowed.
Local labels are valid between two global label definitions.

Otherwise dots (@code{.}) are not allowed within a label by default, unless
the option @option{-ldots} or @option{-devpac} was specified. Even then,
labels ending on @code{.b}, @code{.w} or @code{.l} are never possible.

It is possible to refer to any local symbol in the source by preceding its
name with the name of the last global symbol, which was defined before:
@code{global_name\local_name}. This is for PhxAss compatibility only,
and is no recommended style. Does not work in a macro, as it conflicts
with macro arguments.

Make sure that you don't define a label on the same line as a
directive for conditional assembly (if, else, endif)! This is not supported.

In this syntax module, the operand field must not contain any whitespace
characters, as long as the option @option{-spaces} was not specified.

Comments are introduced by the comment character @code{;} or @code{*}.
The rest of the line will be ignored. Also everything following the operand
field, separated by a whitespace, will be regarded as comment. Be careful
with @code{*}, which is recognized as the "current pc symbol" in any operand
expression

Example:

@code{mylabel inst.q op1,op2,op3  ;comment}

In expressions, numbers starting with @code{$} are hexadecimal (e.g.
@code{$fb2c}). @code{%} introduces binary numbers (e.g. @code{%1100101}).
Numbers starting with @code{@@} are assumed to be octal numbers, e.g.
@code{@@237}. All numbers starting with a digit are decimal, e.g. 
@code{1239}.


@section Directives

The following directives are supported by this syntax module (provided the
CPU- and output-module support them):

@table @code
@item <symbol> = <expression>
      Equivalent to @code{<symbol> equ <expression>}.

@item align <bitcount>
      Insert as much zero bytes as required to reach an address where
      <bitcount> low order bits are zero. For example @code{align 2} would
      make an alignment to the next 32-bit boundary.
      Equivalent to @code{cnop 0,1<<bitcount}.

@item blk.b <exp>[,<fill>]
      Equivalent to @code{dcb.b <exp>,<fill>}.

@item blk.d <exp>[,<fill>]
      Equivalent to @code{dcb.d <exp>,<fill>}.

@item blk.l <exp>[,<fill>]
      Equivalent to @code{dcb.l <exp>,<fill>}.

@item blk.q <exp>[,<fill>]
      Equivalent to @code{dcb.q <exp>,<fill>}.

@item blk.s <exp>[,<fill>]
      Equivalent to @code{dcb.s <exp>,<fill>}.

@item blk.w <exp>[,<fill>]
      Equivalent to @code{dcb.w <exp>,<fill>}.

@item blk.x <exp>[,<fill>]
      Equivalent to @code{dcb.x <exp>,<fill>}.

@item bss
      Equivalent to @code{section bss,bss}.

@item bss_c
      Equivalent to @code{section bss_c,bss,chip}.

@item bss_f
      Equivalent to @code{section bss_f,bss,fast}.

@item cargs [#<offset>,]<symbol1>[.<size1>][,<symbol2>[.<size2>]]...
      Defines <symbol1> with the value of <offset>. Further symbols
      on the line, separated by comma, will be assigned the <offset> plus
      the size of the previous symbol. The size defaults to 2. Valid
      optional size extensions are: @code{.b}, @code{.w}, @code{.l},
      where @code{.l} results in a size of 4, the others 2.
      The <offset> argument defaults to 4, when not given.

@item clrfo
      Reset stack-frame offset counter to zero. See @code{fo} directive.

@item clrso
      Reset structure offset counter to zero. See @code{so} directive.

@item cnop <offset>,<alignment>
      Insert as much zero bytes as required to reach an address which
      can be divided by <alignment>. Then add <offset> zero bytes.

@item code
      Equivalent to @code{section code,code}.

@item code_c
      Equivalent to @code{section code_c,code,chip}.

@item code_f
      Equivalent to @code{section code_f,code,fast}.

@item comment
      Everything in the operand field is ignored and seen as a comment.
      There is only one exception, when the operand contains @code{HEAD=}.
      Then the following expression is passed to the TOS output module
      via the symbol '@code{ TOSFLAGS}', to define the Atari specific TOS
      flags.

@item cseg
      Equivalent to @code{section code,code}.

@item data
      Equivalent to @code{section data,data}.

@item data_c
      Equivalent to @code{section data_c,data,chip}.

@item data_f
      Equivalent to @code{section data_f,data,fast}.

@item dc.b <exp1>[,<exp2>,"<string1>",'<string2>'...]
      Assign the integer or string constant operands into successive
      bytes of memory in the current section. Any combination of integer
      and character string constant operands is permitted.

@item dc.d <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Assign the values of the operands into successive 64-bit words
      of memory in the current section. Also IEEE double precision
      floating point constants are allowed.

@item dc.l <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Assign the values of the operands into successive 32-bit words
      of memory in the current section.

@item dc.q <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Assign the values of the operands into successive 64-bit words
      of memory in the current section.

@item dc.s <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Assign the values of the operands into successive 32-bit words
      of memory in the current section. Also IEEE single precision
      floating point constants are allowed.

@item dc.w <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Assign the values of the operands into successive 16-bit words
      of memory in the current section.

@item dc.x <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Assign the values of the operands into successive 96-bit words
      of memory in the current section. Also IEEE extended precision
      floating point constants are allowed.

@item dcb.b <exp>[,<fill>]
      Insert <exp> zero or <fill> bytes into the current section.

@item dcb.d <exp>[,<fill>]
      Insert <exp> zero or <fill> 64-bit words into the current section.
      <fill> might also be an IEEE double precision constant.

@item dcb.l <exp>[,<fill>]
      Insert <exp> zero or <fill> 32-bit words into the current section.

@item dcb.q <exp>[,<fill>]
      Insert <exp> zero or <fill> 64-bit words into the current section.

@item dcb.s <exp>[,<fill>]
      Insert <exp> zero or <fill> 32-bit words into the current section.
      <fill> might also be an IEEE single precision constant.

@item dcb.w <exp>[,<fill>]
      Insert <exp> zero or <fill> 16-bit words into the current section.

@item dcb.x <exp>[,<fill>]
      Insert <exp> zero or <fill> 96-bit words into the current section.
      <fill> might also be an IEEE extended precision constant.

@item dr.b <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Calculates <expN> - <current pc value> and stores it into successive
      bytes of memory in the current section.

@item dr.w <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Calculates <expN> - <current pc value> and stores it into successive
      16-bit words of memory in the current section.

@item dr.l <exp1>[,<exp2>...]
      Calculates <expN> - <current pc value> and stores it into successive
      32-bit words of memory in the current section.

@item ds.b <exp>
      Equivalent to @code{dcb.b <exp>,0}.

@item ds.d <exp>
      Equivalent to @code{dcb.d <exp>,0}.

@item ds.l <exp>
      Equivalent to @code{dcb.l <exp>,0}.

@item ds.q <exp>
      Equivalent to @code{dcb.q <exp>,0}.

@item ds.s <exp>
      Equivalent to @code{dcb.s <exp>,0}.

@item ds.w <exp>
      Equivalent to @code{dcb.w <exp>,0}.

@item ds.x <exp>
      Equivalent to @code{dcb.x <exp>,0}.

@item dseg
      Equivalent to @code{section data,data}.

@item echo <string>
      Prints <string> to stdout.

@item else
      Assemble the following lines if the previous @code{if} condition
      was false.

@item end
      Assembly will terminate behind this line.

@item endif
      Ends a section of conditional assembly.

@item endm
      Ends a macro definition.

@item endr
      Ends a repetition block.

@item <symbol> equ <expression>
      Define a new program symbol with the name <symbol> and assign to it
      the value of <expression>. Defining <symbol> twice will cause
      an error.

@item erem
      Ends an outcommented block. Assembly will continue.

@item even
      Aligns to an even address. Equivalent to @code{cnop 0,2}.

@item fail <message>
      Immediately break assembly with a fatal error, showing the <message>
      from the operand field.

@item <label> fo.<size> <expression>
      Assigns the current value of the stack-frame offset counter to <label>.
      Afterwards the counter is decremented by the instruction's <size>
      multiplied by <expression>. Any valid M68k size extension is allowed
      for <size>: b, w, l, q, s, d, x, p.
      The offset counter can also be referenced directly under the name
      @code{__FO}.

@item idnt <name>
      Sets the file or module name in the generated object file to
      <name>, when the selected output module supports it. By default,
      the input filename passed on the command line is used.

@item if <expression>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <expression> is non-zero.

@item ifeq <expression>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <expression> is zero.

@item ifne <expression>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <expression> is non-zero.

@item ifgt <expression>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <expression> is
      greater than zero.

@item ifge <expression>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <expression> is
      greater than zero or equal.

@item iflt <expression>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <expression> is
      less than zero.

@item ifle <expression>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <expression> is
      less than zero or equal.

@item ifb <operand>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines when <operand> is
      completely blank, except an optional comment.

@item ifnb <operand>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines when <operand> is
      non-blank.

@item ifc <string1>,<string2>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <string1> matches
      <string2>.

@item ifnc <string1>,<string2>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <string1> does not
      match <string2>.

@item ifd <symbol>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <symbol> is defined.

@item ifnd <symbol>
      Conditionally assemble the following lines if <symbol> is undefined.

@item incbin <file>
      Inserts the binary contents of <file> into the object code at
      this position. The file will be searched first in the current
      directory, then in all paths defined by @option{-I} or @code{incdir}
      in the order of occurence.

@item incdir <path>
      Add another path to search for include files to the list of
      known paths. Paths defined with @option{-I} on the command line are
      searched first.

@item include <file>
      Include source text of <file> at this position. The include file
      will be searched first in the current directory, then in all
      paths defined by @option{-I} or @code{incdir} in the order of
      occurence.

@item list
      The following lines will appear in the listing file, if it was
      requested.

@item llen <len>
      Set the line length in a listing file to a maximum of <len> characters.
      Currently without any effect.

@item macro <name>
      Defines a macro which can be referenced by <name>. The <name>
      may also appear at the left side of the @code{macro} directive,
      starting at the first column. Then the operand field is ignored.
      The macro definition is closed
      by an @code{endm} directive. When calling a macro you may pass
      up to 9 arguments, separated by comma. Those arguments are
      referenced within the macro context as @code{\1} to @code{\9}.
      Argument @code{\0} is set to the macro's first qualifier
      (mnemonic extension), when given.
      In Devpac- and PhxAss-compatibility mode up to 35 arguments are
      accepted, where argument 10-35 can be referenced by @code{\a} to
      @code{\z}.
      The special argument @code{\@@} inserts a unique id, useful for
      defining labels. @code{\#} is replaced by the number of arguments
      (also stored in @code{NARG}) and @code{\?n} is replaced by the
      length of argument @code{n}.
      @code{\.} selects the argument indexed by the current value of
      @code{CARG}. @code{\+} and @code{\-} do the same, but additionally
      post-increment and post-decrement @code{CARG}.
      @code{\()} may be used as a separator between the name of a macro
      argument and the subsequent text.

@item mexit
      Leave the current macro and continue with assembling the parent
      context. Note that this directive also resets the level of conditional
      assembly to a state before the macro was invoked (which means that
      it works as a 'break' command on all new @code{if} directives).

@item nolist
      The following lines will not be visible in a listing file.

@item nopage
      Never start a new page in the listing file.
      This implementation will only prevent emitting the formfeed code.

@item odd
      Aligns to an odd address. Equivalent to @code{cnop 1,2}.

@item offset [<expression>]
      Switches to a special offset-section. The contents of such a section
      is not included in the output. Their labels may be referenced as
      absolute offset symbols. Can be used to define structure offsets.
      The optional <expression> gives the start offset for this section.
      When missing the last offset of the previous offset-section is used,
      or 0.

@item org <expression>
      Sets the base address for the subsequent code.

@item output <name>
      Sets the output file name to @code{<name>} when no output name was
      given on the command line. A special case for Devpac-compatibility
      is when @code{<name>} starts with a @code{'.'} and an output name was
      already given. Then the current output name gets @code{<name>}
      appended as an extension. When an extension already exists,
      then it is replaced.

@item page
      Start a new page in the listing file (not implemented).
      Make sure to start a new page when the maximum page length is reached.

@item plen <len>
      The the page length for a listing file to <len> lines.
      Currently ignored.

@item printt <string>
      Prints <string> to stdout.

@item printv <expression>
      Evaluate <expression> and print it to stdout out in decimal and
      hexadecimal form.

@item public <symbol>[,<symbol>...]
      Flag <symbol> as an external symbol, which means that <symbol> is
      visible to all modules in the linking process. It may be either
      defined or undefined.

@item rem
      The assembler will ignore everything from encountering the @code{rem}
      directive until an @code{erem} directive was found.

@item rept <expression>
      Repeats the assembly of the block between @code{rept} and @code{endr}
      <expression> number of times. <expression> has to be positive.
      The internal symbol @code{REPTN} always holds the iteration counter
      of the inner repeat loop, starting with 0. @code{REPTN} is -1 outside
      of any repeat block.

@item rorg <expression>
      Sets the program counter <expression> bytes behind the start of the
      current section. The new program counter must not be smaller than the
      current one. The space will be padded with zeros.

@item <label> rs.<size> <expression>
      Works like the @code{so} directive, with the only difference that
      the offset symbol is named @code{__RS}.

@item rsreset
      Equivalent to @code{clrso}, but the symbol manipulated is @code{__RS}.

@item rsset
      Equivalent to @code{setso}, but the symbol manipulated is @code{__RS}.

@item section [<name>,]<sec_type>[,<mem_type>]]
      Starts a new section named @code{<name>} or reactivates an old one.
      @code{<sec_type>} defines the section type and may be @code{code},
      @code{text} (same as @code{code}), @code{data} or @code{bss}.
      @code{<sec_type>} defaults to @code{code} in Phxass mode. Otherwise
      a single argument will start a section with the type and name of
      @code{<sec_type>}. When @code{<mem_type>} is given
      it defines the type of memory, where the section can
      be loaded. This is Amiga-specific, and allowed identifiers are
      @code{chip} for Chip-RAM and @code{fast} for Fast-RAM. Optionally
      it is also possible to attach the suffix @code{_C}, @code{_F} or
      @code{_P} to the @code{<sec_type>} argument for defining the memory type.

@item <symbol> set <expression>
      Create a new symbol with the name <symbol> and assign
      the value of <expression>. If <symbol> is already assigned, it will
      contain a new value from now on.

@item setfo <expression>
      Sets the stack-frame offset counter to <expresion>.
      See @code{fo} directive.

@item setso <expression>
      Sets the structure offset counter to <expresion>.
      See @code{so} directive.

@item <label> so.<size> <expression>
      Assigns the current value of the structure offset counter to <label>.
      Afterwards the counter is incremented by the instruction's <size>
      multiplied by <expression>. Any valid M68k size extension is allowed
      for <size>: b, w, l, q, s, d, x, p.
      The offset counter can also be referenced directly under the name
      @code{__SO}.

@item spc <lines>
      Output <lines> number of blank lines in the listing file.
      Currently without any effect.

@item text
      Equivalent to @code{section code,code}.

@item ttl <name>
      PhxAss syntax. Equivalent to @code{idnt <name>}.

@item <name> ttl
      Motorola syntax. Equivalent to @code{idnt <name>}.

@item xdef <symbol>[,<symbol>...]
      Flag <symbol> as an global symbol, which means that
      <symbol> is visible to all modules in the linking process.
      See also @code{public}.

@item xref <symbol>[,<symbol>...]
      Flag <symbol> as externally defined, which means it has to
      be important from another module in the linking process.
      See also @code{public}.

@end table

@section Known Problems

    Some known problems of this module at the moment:

@itemize @minus

@item None?

@end itemize

@section Error Messages

This module has the following error messages:

@itemize @minus
@item 1001: mnemonic expected
@item 1002: invalid extension
@item 1003: no space before oprands
@item 1004: too many closing parentheses
@item 1005: missing closing parentheses
@item 1006: missing operand
@item 1007: garbage at end of line
@item 1008: syntax error
@item 1009: invalid data operand
@item 1010: , expected
@item 1011: identifier expected
@item 1012: directive has no effect
@item 1013: expression must be a constant
@item 1014: illegal section type
@item 1015: repeatedly defined symbol
@item 1016: illegal memory type
@item 1017: unexpected %s without %s
@item 1018: endc/endif missing for conditional block started at %s line %d
@item 1020: maximum if-nesting depth exceeded (%d levels)
@item 1022: missing %c

@end itemize
